# S&P 500 Stock Market Data Pipeline
- This project is a stock market data pipeline fully developed in python. Its primary objective is to simulate real-world data pipeline logic, generating features and outputs that can be utilized in future Machine Learning and Data Science/Analysis projects.

## Project Overview
- This project si a modular data pipeline designed to transform multiple raw data files into a clean and usable dataset. 
- Its objective is to ingest data, perform extraction, cleaning, feature engineering, transformation, and load the results into a structured dataset suitable for financial dara projects.
- Although the project is implemented entirely in Python, it is designed to simulate, at a smaller scale, the architecture, implementation, and structure of real-world data engineering pipelines.

## Architecture
The pipeline was designed in modules that follows the flow bellow:
```
raw_data -> extract -> clean,transform and aggregate -> load -> log -> processed data
```
Folder structure:
```
log_files/         # stores all logging files
pipeline/          # stores the pipeline functions
    extract.py     # extract raw data and turns it into a single dataframe (list)
    load.py        # take data, turns it into .csv files and send it to processed_data/ folder
    transform.py   # Cleans data, adds features, and generates an aggregated dataset        
processed_data/    # stores processed and aggregated dataframes sent by load.py
raw_data/          # stores raw '.csv' stock market data
logging_config.py  # set the logging configurations
main.py            # orchestrates the pipeline/ folder files and put it all together
```

## Pipeline Stages

### 1. Extract
    1. Receives all files from the 'raw_data/' folder.
    2. Filters and processes only '.csv' files.
    3. Creates a 'symbol' column using the file name (stock ticker) as a reference.
    4. Stores all resulting DataFrames in a list and returns it as the function output.
        
### 2. Transform
This module contains four main functions:
        
#### concatenate
    1. Receives the list generated by the 'extract.py' module.
    2. Concatenates all DataFrames into a single unified dataset.
    3. Returns the resulting DataFrame.
        
#### clean_data
    1. Receives the DataFrame from 'concatenate'.
    2. Removes duplicate rows and rows with null values.
    3. Set the right datatype for each column.
    4. Returns the cleaned df.

#### create_features
    1. Receives the DataFrame from 'clean_data'
    2. Adds new columns with useful information derived from previously existing data.
    3. Returns the enriched DataFrame.

#### create_aggregations
    1. Receives DataFrame from 'create_features'.
    2. Aggregates the data into a new table with the following columns: ['symbol', 'total_volume', 'volume_mean', 'volume_std', 'price_mean', 'min_price',
    'max_price', 'price_std', 'return_mean', 'return_std'].
    3. Returns the new DataFrame.

        
### 3. Load
#### load_clean_data
    1. Receives DataFrame from 'create_features'. 
    2. Exports it as a '.csv' file to the 'processed_data/' folder with the name 'clean_data.csv'.
    3. Does not return values.

#### load_aggregated_data
    1. Receives DataFrame from 'create_aggregations'.
    2. Exports it as a '.csv' file to the 'processed_data/' folder with the name 'agg_data.csv'.
    3. Does not return values.

### 4. Main
- Orchestrates the entire pipeline by calling all modules and executing the workflow.
- Uses the 'sys' library to handle command-line arguments (argv).
- The execution behavior depends on the command provided by the user. Available commands include:
- `python main.py clean`: Executes only the `load_clean_data` stage.
- `python main.py agg`: Executes only the `load_aggregated_data` stage.
- `python main.py` or `python main.py` all: Executes the full pipeline (both clean and aggregation processes).  

## Libraries Used
- `pandas`: Used for data ingestion, processing, and manipulation.
- `pathlib`: Handles file system paths and manages reading from and writing to directories.
- `numpy`: Supports numerical operations and data transformations.
- `logging`: Implements structured logging and generates log files for informing how the process goes.
- `sys`: Enables handling of command-line arguments (argv) in `main.py`.

## Outputs
The generated outputs depend on the command-line argument used:
- `python main.py clean`: Generates a `.csv` file produced by `load_clean_data` in the `processed_data/` directory, along with a `.log` file generated by `logging_setup` in the `log_files/` directory.
- `python main.py agg`: Generates a `.csv` file produced by `load_aggregated_data` in the `processed_data/` directory, along with a `.log` file generated by `logging_setup` in the `log_files/` directory.
- `python main.py` or `python main.py all`: Generates both `.csv` files (`clean_data.csv` and `agg_data.csv`) in the `processed_data/` directory, as well as a `.log` file generated by `logging_setup` in the `log_files/` directory.

## How to Run
1. Clone the repository
2. Install the required dependencies
3. Place your CSV files in the `raw_data/` folder
4. Run the pipeline:
```bash
python main.py clean   # run data cleaning only
python main.py agg     # run aggregation only
python main.py all     # run full pipeline
```
5. the output files will be in `processed_data/` and `log_files/` folder